docs: document column-level privileges (v8.5) (#22574)
pingcap/docs: column-privilege-management.md

``
title: Column-Level Privilege Management
summary: TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism, allowing you to grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table using `GRANT` or `REVOKE`, thus achieving finer-grained access control.
---

# Column-Level Privilege Management

> Starting from version v8.5.6, TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism. With column-level privileges, you can grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table, achieving finer-grained data access control.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting from v8.5.6, TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism. With column-level privileges, you can grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table, achieving finer-grained data access control.
```

## Revoke column-level privileges

The following example revokes the `SELECT` privilege on column `col2` from user `newuser`:

```sql
REVOKE SELECT(col2) ON test.tbl FROM 'newuser'@'%';
SHOW GRANTS FOR 'newuser'@'%';
```

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Grants for newuser@%                                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| GRANT USAGE ON *.* TO 'newuser'@'%'                           |
| GRANT SELECT(col1), UPDATE(col3) ON test.tbl TO 'newuser'@'%' |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Column-level privilege access control example

After granting or revoking column-level privileges, TiDB performs privilege checks on columns referenced in SQL statements. For example:

* `SELECT` statements: `SELECT` column privileges affect columns referenced in the `SELECT` list as well as `WHERE`, `ORDER BY`, and other clauses.
* `UPDATE` statements: Columns being updated in the `SET` clause require `UPDATE` column privileges. Columns read in expressions or conditions usually also require `SELECT` column privileges.

> * `INSERT` statements: Columns being written to require `INSERT` column privileges. `INSERT INTO t VALUES (...)` is equivalent to writing to all columns.

Author: ```suggestion
* `UPDATE` statements: columns being updated in the `SET` clause require `UPDATE` column privileges. Columns read in expressions or conditions usually also require `SELECT` column privileges.
* `INSERT` statements: columns being written to require `INSERT` column privileges. `INSERT INTO t VALUES (...)` is equivalent to writing to all columns.
```

| Revoking column-level privileges not granted to a user | `REVOKE` executes successfully.                                                                                                                                        | `REVOKE` throws an error.                                                                                                                                                        |
| Execution order of column pruning and `SELECT` privilege check | `SELECT` column privileges are checked first, then column pruning is performed. For example: executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` requires `SELECT` column privileges for both `t.a` and `t.b`. | Column pruning is performed first, then `SELECT` column privileges are checked. For example: executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` only requires `SELECT` column privilege for `t.a`. |

### Column pruning and privilege checks in view scenarios

> When performing `SELECT` privilege checks on views, MySQL first prunes columns in the view's internal query and then checks the column privileges of the internal tables, making the checks relatively lenient in some scenarios. TiDB does not perform column pruning before privilege checks, so additional column privileges might be required.

Author: ```suggestion
When performing `SELECT` privilege checks on views, MySQL and TiDB differ as follows:

- MySQL first prunes columns in the view's internal query and then checks the column privileges of the internal tables, making the checks relatively lenient in some scenarios. 
- TiDB does not perform column pruning before privilege checks, so additional column privileges might be required.
```

---
title: Column-Level Privilege Management

> summary: TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism, enabling you to grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table using `GRANT` or `REVOKE`, thus achieving finer-grained access control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism. You can grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table using `GRANT` or `REVOKE`, achieving finer-grained access control.
```

---

# Column-Level Privilege Management

> Starting from v8.5.6, TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism. With column-level privileges, you can grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns of a table, achieving finer-grained data access control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from v8.5.6, TiDB supports a MySQL-compatible column-level privilege management mechanism. With column-level privileges, you can grant or revoke `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES` privileges on specific columns in a specified table, achieving finer-grained data access control.
```

> **Note:**
>

> > Although MySQL syntax allows column-level specification like `REFERENCES(col_name)`, `REFERENCES` itself is a database/table-level privilege used for foreign key-related permission checks. Therefore, column-level `REFERENCES` does not actually take effect in MySQL. TiDB's behavior is consistent with MySQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Although MySQL syntax allows column-level syntax such as `REFERENCES(col_name)`, `REFERENCES` itself is a database-level or table-level privilege used for foreign key-related privilege checks. Therefore, column-level `REFERENCES` does not produce any actual column-level privilege effect in MySQL. TiDB's behavior is consistent with MySQL.
```

## Syntax

> Granting and revoking column-level privileges are similar to table-level privileges, with the following differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax for granting and revoking column-level privileges is similar to that for table-level privileges, with the following differences:
```

> - The column name list is placed after the **privilege type**, not after the **table name**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write the column name list after the **privilege type**, not after the **table name**.
```

- Multiple column names are separated by commas (`,`).

```sql
GRANT priv_type(col_name [, col_name] ...) [, priv_type(col_name [, col_name] ...)] ...
    ON db_name.tbl_name
    TO 'user'@'host';

REVOKE priv_type(col_name [, col_name] ...) [, priv_type(col_name [, col_name] ...)] ...
    ON db_name.tbl_name
    FROM 'user'@'host';
```

Where:

* `priv_type` supports `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `REFERENCES`.

> * The `ON` clause requires specifying the specific table, for example, `test.tbl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `ON` clause must specify a table, for example, `test.tbl`.
```

* A single `GRANT` or `REVOKE` statement can include multiple privilege items, and each privilege item can specify its own list of column names.

For example, the following statement grants `SELECT` privileges on `col1` and `col2` and `UPDATE` privilege on `col3` to the user:

```sql
GRANT SELECT(col1, col2), UPDATE(col3) ON test.tbl TO 'user'@'host';
```

> ## Grant column-level privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Grant column-level privilege example
```

> ## Grant column-level privilege example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example: Grant column-level privileges
```

> ## Example: Granting column-level privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example: Grant column-level privileges
```

> The following example grants the `SELECT` privilege on `col1` and `col2` of table `test.tbl` to user `newuser`, and grants the `UPDATE` privilege on `col3` to the same user:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example grants user `newuser` the `SELECT` privilege on `col1` and `col2` in table `test.tbl`, and grants the same user the `UPDATE` privilege on `col3`:
```

```sql
CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS test;
USE test;

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS tbl;
CREATE TABLE tbl (col1 INT, col2 INT, col3 INT);

DROP USER IF EXISTS 'newuser'@'%';
CREATE USER 'newuser'@'%';

GRANT SELECT(col1, col2), UPDATE(col3) ON test.tbl TO 'newuser'@'%';
SHOW GRANTS FOR 'newuser'@'%';
```

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Grants for newuser@%                                                |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| GRANT USAGE ON *.* TO 'newuser'@'%'                                 |
| GRANT SELECT(col1, col2), UPDATE(col3) ON test.tbl TO 'newuser'@'%' |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

In addition to using `SHOW GRANTS`, you can also view column-level privilege information by querying `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.COLUMN_PRIVILEGES`.

> ## Revoke column-level privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Revoke column-level privilege example
```

> ## Revoke column-level privilege example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example: Revoke column-level privileges
```

The following example revokes the `SELECT` privilege on column `col2` from user `newuser`:

```sql
REVOKE SELECT(col2) ON test.tbl FROM 'newuser'@'%';
SHOW GRANTS FOR 'newuser'@'%';
```

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Grants for newuser@%                                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| GRANT USAGE ON *.* TO 'newuser'@'%'                           |
| GRANT SELECT(col1), UPDATE(col3) ON test.tbl TO 'newuser'@'%' |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
```

> ## Column-level privilege access control example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example: Column-level privilege access control
```

After granting or revoking column-level privileges, TiDB performs privilege checks on columns referenced in SQL statements. For example:

* `SELECT` statements: `SELECT` column privileges affect columns referenced in the `SELECT` list as well as `WHERE`, `ORDER BY`, and other clauses.
* `UPDATE` statements: columns being updated in the `SET` clause require `UPDATE` column privileges. Columns read in expressions or conditions usually also require `SELECT` column privileges.

> * `INSERT` statements: columns being written to require `INSERT` column privileges. `INSERT INTO t VALUES (...)` is equivalent to writing to all columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `INSERT` statements: columns being written to require `INSERT` column privileges. `INSERT INTO t VALUES (...)` is equivalent to writing values to all columns in table definition order.
```

UPDATE tbl SET col3 = col1;
UPDATE tbl SET col3 = col3 + 1; -- Error (missing SELECT column privilege for col3)
UPDATE tbl SET col3 = col1 WHERE col1 > 0;
```

## Compatibility differences with MySQL

TiDB's column-level privileges are generally compatible with MySQL. However, there are differences in the following scenarios:

| Scenario                                             | TiDB                                                                                                                                                                   | MySQL                                                                                                                                                                            |
| :--------------------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Revoking column-level privileges not granted to a user | `REVOKE` executes successfully.                                                                                                                                        | `REVOKE` throws an error.                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Revoking column-level privileges not granted to a user | `REVOKE` executes successfully. | When `IF EXISTS` is not used, `REVOKE` returns an error. |
```

> | Execution order of column pruning and `SELECT` privilege check | `SELECT` column privileges are checked first, then column pruning is performed. For example: executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` requires `SELECT` column privileges for both `t.a` and `t.b`. | Column pruning is performed first, then `SELECT` column privileges are checked. For example: executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` only requires `SELECT` column privilege for `t.a`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Execution order of column pruning and `SELECT` privilege check | `SELECT` column privileges are checked before column pruning. For example, executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` requires `SELECT` column privileges on both `t.a` and `t.b`. | Column pruning is performed before `SELECT` column privileges are checked. For example, executing `SELECT a FROM (SELECT a, b FROM t) s` only requires the `SELECT` column privilege on `t.a`. |
```

```sql
-- Prepare the environment by logging in as root
DROP USER IF EXISTS 'u'@'%';
CREATE USER 'u'@'%';

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS t;
CREATE TABLE t (a INT, b INT, c INT, d INT);

DROP VIEW IF EXISTS v;
CREATE SQL SECURITY INVOKER VIEW v AS SELECT a, b FROM t WHERE c = 0 ORDER BY d;

GRANT SELECT ON v TO 'u'@'%';

-- Log in as u
SELECT a FROM v;
-- MySQL: Error, missing access privileges for t.a, t.c, t.d
-- TiDB: Error, missing access privileges for t.a, t.b, t.c, t.d

-- Log in as root
GRANT SELECT(a, c, d) ON t TO 'u'@'%';

-- Log in as u
SELECT a FROM v;
-- MySQL: Success (internal query is pruned to `SELECT a FROM t WHERE c = 0 ORDER BY d`)
-- TiDB: Error, missing access privileges for t.b

SELECT * FROM v;
-- MySQL: Error, missing access privileges for t.b
-- TiDB: Error, missing access privileges for t.b

-- Log in as root
GRANT SELECT(b) ON t TO 'u'@'%';

-- Log in as u
SELECT * FROM v;
-- MySQL: Success
-- TiDB: Success
```

## See also

* [Privilege Management](/privilege-management.md)
* [`GRANT <privileges>`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-grant-privileges.md)
* [`REVOKE <privileges>`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-revoke-privileges.md)

> ```

Author: ```suggestion

```
